Common mistakes in React (#1550)
enkidevs/curriculum: javascript/react/common-mistakes-in-react/dependency-array-for-useeffect.md

---
author: kapnobatai136
  
aspects:

  - workout

  - deep

type: normal

category: tip

links:
  - '[use-deep-compare-effect](https://github.com/kentcdodds/use-deep-compare-effect){website}'

---

# Dependency array for useEffect

---
## Content

> One important feature of the `useEffect()` hook is represented by its dependency array. When included, the dependency array can result in a performance increase due to reducing the number of re-renders. Let's take a look at an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One important feature of the `useEffect()` hook is represented by its dependency array. When included, the `useEffect` hook only runs when one or more of its dependencies change, which can result in a performance increase by reducing the number of re-renders. Let's take a look at an example:
```

```js
function App() {
  const [name, setName] = useState("");
  useEffect(() => {
    document.title = `Welcome to ${name}!`;
  }, [name]);
}
```

> Now, React checks if the current value of name is different from the previous value of name, and only re-renders if that is true.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, React will only re-runs the hook function if the current value of `name` is different from the its previous value.
```

Let's take a look at another example:

```js
function App() {
  const features = ["feature1", "feature2"];

  useEffect(() => {
    // callback
  }, [features]);
}
```

> In this case, React only stores a reference to the `features` array and compares it to the previous reference of the array. We have define the `features` array inside our component, meaning that after every render we recreate the array. When React compares the two references, it will always result on running the callback function. This is because we recreate the `features` array on every render which results in recreating the reference that leads to said array.

Reviewer: Maybe we can rephrase this one a bit to explain that React uses [`Object.is`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/is) (and add a footnote for it).

Here's an idea:

```suggestion
It's important to understand that React uses a similar comparison mechanism[1] to `===` when determining if the value of a dependency changed.

In the case of objects and object-like structures such as arrays, `===` will compare the references of two objects, not the data they contain.

From this follows that, even if we pass `[1, 2, 3]` to `useEffect` twice, the actual values within the array will not matter, React will only be interested if the array itself (i.e. the reference to it) is the same, not its content.

In the example above we are creating the `features` array within the component `App`. This means that anytime `App` renders, `features` will contain a new array instance of with the same contents. When React checks if `features` array is the same as before, it never will be because we're recreating it on each render, therefore the `useEffect` hook will always run.
```

Note that this is not an issue when using strings, primitive values or numbers as these are compared by value rather than reference.

> There are multiple options of dealing with this issue. The first consists of moving the dependency array outside of the component, although in some cases this might not be possible.

Reviewer: You can add a quick code example here:

```jsx
// now we aren't re-creating the array on each render
const features = ["feature1", "feature2"];

function App() {
  useEffect(() => {
    // callback
  }, [features]);
}
```

> The second option is wrapping our value in a `useMemo()` hook which keeps our reference during re-renders:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second option is wrapping our value in a `useMemo()` hook which caches[1] our reference during re-renders:
```

Maybe add a footnote about caching and/or memoization?

```js
function App() {
  const features = useMemo(
    () => ["features1", "features2"],
    []
  );

  useEffect(() => {
    // callback
  }, [features]);
}
```

> The third and last option consists of using a deep compare hook that properly tracks the dependency references. We will not cover this option in this insight, but make sure to check out the resources for a link to a popular custom hook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The third and last option consists of using a deep compare hook that tracks the dependency references and their contents. We will not cover this option in this insight, but make sure to check out the resources for a link to a popular custom hook that handles this use-case.
```
